README.md, before:

<!-- badges: start -->
[![R-CMD-check](https://github.com/r-spatial/sf/actions/workflows/R-CMD-check.yaml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/r-spatial/sf/actions/workflows/R-CMD-check.yaml)
[![tic-db](https://github.com/r-spatial/sf/actions/workflows/tic-db.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/r-spatial/sf/actions/workflows/tic-db.yml)
[![Coverage Status](https://img.shields.io/codecov/c/github/r-spatial/sf/main.svg)](https://app.codecov.io/gh/r-spatial/sf)
[![License](http://img.shields.io/badge/license-GPL%20%28%3E=%202%29-brightgreen.svg?style=flat)](http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-2.0.html)
[![CRAN](http://www.r-pkg.org/badges/version/sf)](https://cran.r-project.org/package=sf)
[![cran checks](https://badges.cranchecks.info/worst/sf.svg)](https://cran.r-project.org/web/checks/check_results_sf.html)
[![Downloads](http://cranlogs.r-pkg.org/badges/sf?color=brightgreen)](https://www.r-pkg.org:443/pkg/sf)
[![status](https://tinyverse.netlify.com/badge/sf)](https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=sf)
<!-- badges: end -->

# Simple Features for R

<a href="https://gist.github.com/edzer/f461a3a95570c4ab7edf3125c2f19d20"><img align="right" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/520851/34887433-ce1d130e-f7c6-11e7-83fc-d60ad4fae6bd.gif" /></a>

A package that provides [simple features access](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Simple_Features) for R. 

[Blogs, links](#blogs-presentations-vignettes-sp-sf-wiki) • [Cheatsheet](#cheatsheet) • [Installing](#installing)
• [Contributing](#contributing) • [Acknowledgment](#acknowledgment) • [How to cite](#how-to-cite)

Package sf:

* represents simple features as records in a `data.frame` or `tibble` with a geometry list-column
* represents natively in R all 17 simple feature types for all dimensions (XY, XYZ, XYM, XYZM)
* interfaces to [GEOS](https://libgeos.org) for geometrical operations on projected coordinates, and (through R package [s2](https://cran.r-project.org/package=s2)) to [s2geometry](http://s2geometry.io/) for geometrical operations on ellipsoidal coordinates
* interfaces to [GDAL](https://gdal.org/), supporting all driver options, `Date` and `POSIXct` and list-columns
* interfaces to [PRØJ](http://proj.org/) for coordinate reference system conversion and transformation
* uses [well-known-binary](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Well-known_text#Well-known_binary) serialisations written in C++/Rcpp for fast I/O with GDAL and GEOS 
* reads from and writes to spatial databases such as [PostGIS](http://postgis.net/) using [DBI](https://cran.r-project.org/package=DBI)
* is extended by 
    * [lwgeom](https://github.com/r-spatial/lwgeom/) for selected liblwgeom/PostGIS functions
    * [stars](https://github.com/r-spatial/stars/) for raster data, and raster or vector data cubes (spatial time series)
    * [sfnetworks](https://luukvdmeer.github.io/sfnetworks/) for geospatial network data

<a href="https://gist.github.com/edzer/442d74a5775abcd5068cf3e73b23687b"><img align="left" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/520851/50280460-e35c1880-044c-11e9-9ed7-cc46754e49db.jpg" /></a>

(Illustration (c) 2018 by <a href="https://twitter.com/allison_horst/status/1071456081308614656">Allison Horst</a>)

## Blogs, presentations, vignettes, sp-sf wiki

* an open access [R Journal article](https://journal.r-project.org/archive/2018/RJ-2018-009/index.html) summarizes the package
* package vignettes: [first](https://r-spatial.github.io/sf/articles/sf1.html), [second](https://r-spatial.github.io/sf/articles/sf2.html), [third](https://r-spatial.github.io/sf/articles/sf3.html), [fourth](https://r-spatial.github.io/sf/articles/sf4.html), [fifth](https://r-spatial.github.io/sf/articles/sf5.html), [sixth](https://r-spatial.github.io/sf/articles/sf6.html), [seventh](https://r-spatial.github.io/sf/articles/sf7.html)
* blog posts: [first](https://r-spatial.org/r/2016/02/15/simple-features-for-r.html), [second](https://r-spatial.org/r/2016/07/18/sf2.html), [third](https://r-spatial.org/r/2016/11/02/sfcran.html), [fourth](https://r-spatial.org/r/2017/01/12/newssf.html)
* the original R Consortium ISC [proposal](PROPOSAL.md), the R Consortium [blog post](https://www.r-consortium.org/blog/2017/01/03/simple-features-now-on-cran)
* presentations: [rstudio::conf 2018](https://edzer.github.io/rstudio_conf/#1) ([video](https://posit.co/resources/videos/tidy-spatial-data-analysis/)), [UseR! 2016](http://pebesma.staff.ifgi.de/pebesma_sfr.pdf)
* wiki page describing [sp-sf migration](https://github.com/r-spatial/sf/wiki/Migrating)

## Cheatsheet
[CC 4.0](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/) BY [Ryan Garnett](https://github.com/ryangarnett)  

<a href="https://github.com/rstudio/cheatsheets/blob/main/sf.pdf"><img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/rstudio/cheatsheets/main/pngs/sf.png" /></a>

## Installing

Install either from CRAN with:
```r
install.packages("sf")
```
This will install binary packages on Windows and MacOS, unless you configured R such that it tries to install source packages; in that case, see below.

Install development versions from GitHub with:
```r
library(remotes)
install_github("r-spatial/sf")
```

### Windows

Installing sf from source works under Windows when [Rtools](https://cran.r-project.org/bin/windows/Rtools/) is installed.

### MacOS

MacOS users are strongly encouraged to install the `sf` binary packages from CRAN, unless they are familiar with compilers, linking, C++ source code, and homebrew.

The easiest way to install `gdal` is using Homebrew. Recent versions of Homebrew include a full-featured up-to-date [gdal formula](https://github.com/Homebrew/homebrew-core/blob/master/Formula/g/gdal.rb), which installs `proj` and `gdal` at the same time:

```
brew install pkg-config
brew install gdal
```

Once gdal is installed, you will be able to install `sf` package from source in R. With the current version of `proj` on homebrew, installation requires additional configuration:

```r
install.packages("sf", type = "source", configure.args = "--with-proj-lib=$(brew --prefix)/lib/")
```

Or the development version:

```r
library(remotes)
install_github("r-spatial/sf", configure.args = "--with-proj-lib=$(brew --prefix)/lib/")
```

If you are using `sf` and `rgdal` together, it is necessary to install `rgdal` from source using this configuration:

```r
install.packages("rgdal", type = "source", configure.args = c("--with-proj-lib=$(brew --prefix)/lib/", "--with-proj-include=$(brew --prefix)/include/"))
```

Alternatively, [these instructions](https://stat.ethz.ch/pipermail/r-sig-mac/2017-June/012429.html) explain how to install gdal using kyngchaos frameworks.

For Mac OS 11 Big Sur source install instruction, see [here](https://github.com/r-spatial/sf/issues/1536#issuecomment-727342736)

### Linux

For Unix-alikes, GDAL (>= 2.0.1), GEOS (>= 3.4.0) and Proj.4 (>= 4.8.0) are required.

#### Ubuntu

Dependencies for recent versions of Ubuntu (18.04 and later) are available in the official repositories; you can install them with:

```sh
apt-get -y update && apt-get install -y  libudunits2-dev libgdal-dev libgeos-dev libproj-dev
```

However, to get more up-to-date versions of dependencies such as GDAL, we recommend adding the [ubuntugis-unstable](http://ppa.launchpad.net/ubuntugis/ubuntugis-unstable/ubuntu/) PPA to the package repositories and installing them as follows:

```sh
sudo add-apt-repository ppa:ubuntugis/ubuntugis-unstable
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get install libudunits2-dev libgdal-dev libgeos-dev libproj-dev libsqlite0-dev
```

Adding this PPA is required for installing `sf` on older versions of Ubuntu (e.g. Xenial).

Another option, for advanced users, is to install dependencies from source; see e.g. an older [Travis](https://github.com/r-spatial/sf/blob/593ee48b34001fe3b383ea73ea57063ecf690732/.travis.yml) config file for hints.

#### Fedora
The following command installs all required dependencies:
```sh
sudo dnf install gdal-devel proj-devel geos-devel sqlite-devel udunits2-devel
```

#### Arch

Get gdal, proj and geos from the main repos, and udunits from the AUR:

```
pacman -S gdal proj geos arrow podofo-0.9
yay/pacaur/yaourt/whatever -S udunits
```

#### Other
To install on Debian, the [rocker geospatial](https://github.com/rocker-org/geospatial) Dockerfiles may be helpful. Ubuntu Dockerfiles are found [here](https://github.com/r-spatial/sf/tree/main/inst/docker).

### Multiple GDAL, GEOS and/or PROJ versions on your system

If you use dynamic linking (installation from source) and have multiple versions of these libraries installed (e.g. one from ubuntugis-unstable, another installed from source in `/usr/local/lib`) then this will in general not work, even when setting `LD_LIBRARY_PATH` manually. See [here](https://github.com/r-spatial/sf/issues/844) for the reason why. 

### lwgeom

Functions and methods that require `liblwgeom`, including ellipsoidal (not spherical or Eucledian) metrics (area, distances), are provide by and used from [lwgeom](https://github.com/r-spatial/lwgeom), which is also on [CRAN](https://cran.r-project.org/package=lwgeom).

## Contributing

* Contributions of all sorts are most welcome, issues and pull requests are the preferred ways of sharing them.
* When contributing pull requests, please adhere to the package style (in package code use `=` rather than `<-`; don't change indentation; tab stops of 4 spaces are preferred)
* This project is released with a [Contributor Code of Conduct](CONDUCT.md). By participating in this project you agree to abide by its terms.

## How to cite

Package `sf` can be cited as: 

* Edzer Pebesma, 2018.  Simple Features for R: Standardized Support
for Spatial Vector Data. The R Journal [10:1, 439-446.](https://journal.r-project.org/archive/2018/RJ-2018-009/index.html)

* Pebesma, E.; Bivand, R. (2023). [Spatial Data Science: With Applications in R](https://r-spatial.org/book/) 
(1st ed.). 314 pages. [Chapman and Hall/CRC](https://doi.org/10.1201/9780429459016).

## Acknowledgment

This project gratefully acknowledges financial [support](https://www.r-consortium.org/projects) from the

<a href="https://www.r-consortium.org/all-projects/awarded-projects/2016-group-1">
<img src="https://www.r-consortium.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/13/2016/09/RConsortium_Horizontal_Pantone.png" width="300">
</a>
<!--
<img src="http://pebesma.staff.ifgi.de/RConsortium_Horizontal_Pantone.png" width="300">
-->

Commit message:

add renv/conda section to README.md
closes #2360

README.md, after:

<!-- badges: start -->
[![R-CMD-check](https://github.com/r-spatial/sf/actions/workflows/R-CMD-check.yaml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/r-spatial/sf/actions/workflows/R-CMD-check.yaml)
[![tic-db](https://github.com/r-spatial/sf/actions/workflows/tic-db.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/r-spatial/sf/actions/workflows/tic-db.yml)
[![Coverage Status](https://img.shields.io/codecov/c/github/r-spatial/sf/main.svg)](https://app.codecov.io/gh/r-spatial/sf)
[![License](http://img.shields.io/badge/license-GPL%20%28%3E=%202%29-brightgreen.svg?style=flat)](http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-2.0.html)
[![CRAN](http://www.r-pkg.org/badges/version/sf)](https://cran.r-project.org/package=sf)
[![cran checks](https://badges.cranchecks.info/worst/sf.svg)](https://cran.r-project.org/web/checks/check_results_sf.html)
[![Downloads](http://cranlogs.r-pkg.org/badges/sf?color=brightgreen)](https://www.r-pkg.org:443/pkg/sf)
[![status](https://tinyverse.netlify.com/badge/sf)](https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=sf)
<!-- badges: end -->

# Simple Features for R

<a href="https://gist.github.com/edzer/f461a3a95570c4ab7edf3125c2f19d20"><img align="right" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/520851/34887433-ce1d130e-f7c6-11e7-83fc-d60ad4fae6bd.gif" /></a>

A package that provides [simple features access](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Simple_Features) for R. 

[Blogs, links](#blogs-presentations-vignettes-sp-sf-wiki) • [Cheatsheet](#cheatsheet) • [Installing](#installing)
• [Contributing](#contributing) • [Acknowledgment](#acknowledgment) • [How to cite](#how-to-cite)

Package sf:

* represents simple features as records in a `data.frame` or `tibble` with a geometry list-column
* represents natively in R all 17 simple feature types for all dimensions (XY, XYZ, XYM, XYZM)
* interfaces to [GEOS](https://libgeos.org) for geometrical operations on projected coordinates, and (through R package [s2](https://cran.r-project.org/package=s2)) to [s2geometry](http://s2geometry.io/) for geometrical operations on ellipsoidal coordinates
* interfaces to [GDAL](https://gdal.org/), supporting all driver options, `Date` and `POSIXct` and list-columns
* interfaces to [PRØJ](http://proj.org/) for coordinate reference system conversion and transformation
* uses [well-known-binary](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Well-known_text#Well-known_binary) serialisations written in C++/Rcpp for fast I/O with GDAL and GEOS 
* reads from and writes to spatial databases such as [PostGIS](http://postgis.net/) using [DBI](https://cran.r-project.org/package=DBI)
* is extended by 
    * [lwgeom](https://github.com/r-spatial/lwgeom/) for selected liblwgeom/PostGIS functions
    * [stars](https://github.com/r-spatial/stars/) for raster data, and raster or vector data cubes (spatial time series)
    * [sfnetworks](https://luukvdmeer.github.io/sfnetworks/) for geospatial network data

<a href="https://gist.github.com/edzer/442d74a5775abcd5068cf3e73b23687b"><img align="left" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/520851/50280460-e35c1880-044c-11e9-9ed7-cc46754e49db.jpg" /></a>

(Illustration (c) 2018 by <a href="https://twitter.com/allison_horst/status/1071456081308614656">Allison Horst</a>)

## Blogs, presentations, vignettes, sp-sf wiki

* an open access [R Journal article](https://journal.r-project.org/archive/2018/RJ-2018-009/index.html) summarizes the package
* package vignettes: [first](https://r-spatial.github.io/sf/articles/sf1.html), [second](https://r-spatial.github.io/sf/articles/sf2.html), [third](https://r-spatial.github.io/sf/articles/sf3.html), [fourth](https://r-spatial.github.io/sf/articles/sf4.html), [fifth](https://r-spatial.github.io/sf/articles/sf5.html), [sixth](https://r-spatial.github.io/sf/articles/sf6.html), [seventh](https://r-spatial.github.io/sf/articles/sf7.html)
* blog posts: [first](https://r-spatial.org/r/2016/02/15/simple-features-for-r.html), [second](https://r-spatial.org/r/2016/07/18/sf2.html), [third](https://r-spatial.org/r/2016/11/02/sfcran.html), [fourth](https://r-spatial.org/r/2017/01/12/newssf.html)
* the original R Consortium ISC [proposal](PROPOSAL.md), the R Consortium [blog post](https://www.r-consortium.org/blog/2017/01/03/simple-features-now-on-cran)
* presentations: [rstudio::conf 2018](https://edzer.github.io/rstudio_conf/#1) ([video](https://posit.co/resources/videos/tidy-spatial-data-analysis/)), [UseR! 2016](http://pebesma.staff.ifgi.de/pebesma_sfr.pdf)
* wiki page describing [sp-sf migration](https://github.com/r-spatial/sf/wiki/Migrating)

## Cheatsheet
[CC 4.0](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/) BY [Ryan Garnett](https://github.com/ryangarnett)  

<a href="https://github.com/rstudio/cheatsheets/blob/main/sf.pdf"><img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/rstudio/cheatsheets/main/pngs/sf.png" /></a>

## Installing

Install either from CRAN with:
```r
install.packages("sf")
```
This will install binary packages on Windows and MacOS, unless you configured R such that it tries to install source packages; in that case, see below.

Install development versions from GitHub with:
```r
library(remotes)
install_github("r-spatial/sf")
```

### Windows

Installing sf from source works under Windows when [Rtools](https://cran.r-project.org/bin/windows/Rtools/) is installed.

### MacOS

MacOS users are strongly encouraged to install the `sf` binary packages from CRAN, unless they are familiar with compilers, linking, C++ source code, and homebrew.

The easiest way to install `gdal` is using Homebrew. Recent versions of Homebrew include a full-featured up-to-date [gdal formula](https://github.com/Homebrew/homebrew-core/blob/master/Formula/g/gdal.rb), which installs `proj` and `gdal` at the same time:

```
brew install pkg-config
brew install gdal
```

Once gdal is installed, you will be able to install `sf` package from source in R. With the current version of `proj` on homebrew, installation requires additional configuration:

```r
install.packages("sf", type = "source", configure.args = "--with-proj-lib=$(brew --prefix)/lib/")
```

Or the development version:

```r
library(remotes)
install_github("r-spatial/sf", configure.args = "--with-proj-lib=$(brew --prefix)/lib/")
```

If you are using `sf` and `rgdal` together, it is necessary to install `rgdal` from source using this configuration:

```r
install.packages("rgdal", type = "source", configure.args = c("--with-proj-lib=$(brew --prefix)/lib/", "--with-proj-include=$(brew --prefix)/include/"))
```

Alternatively, [these instructions](https://stat.ethz.ch/pipermail/r-sig-mac/2017-June/012429.html) explain how to install gdal using kyngchaos frameworks.

For Mac OS 11 Big Sur source install instruction, see [here](https://github.com/r-spatial/sf/issues/1536#issuecomment-727342736)

### Linux

For Unix-alikes, GDAL (>= 2.0.1), GEOS (>= 3.4.0) and Proj.4 (>= 4.8.0) are required.

#### Ubuntu

Dependencies for recent versions of Ubuntu (18.04 and later) are available in the official repositories; you can install them with:

```sh
apt-get -y update && apt-get install -y  libudunits2-dev libgdal-dev libgeos-dev libproj-dev
```

However, to get more up-to-date versions of dependencies such as GDAL, we recommend adding the [ubuntugis-unstable](http://ppa.launchpad.net/ubuntugis/ubuntugis-unstable/ubuntu/) PPA to the package repositories and installing them as follows:

```sh
sudo add-apt-repository ppa:ubuntugis/ubuntugis-unstable
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get install libudunits2-dev libgdal-dev libgeos-dev libproj-dev libsqlite0-dev
```

Adding this PPA is required for installing `sf` on older versions of Ubuntu (e.g. Xenial).

Another option, for advanced users, is to install dependencies from source; see e.g. an older [Travis](https://github.com/r-spatial/sf/blob/593ee48b34001fe3b383ea73ea57063ecf690732/.travis.yml) config file for hints.

#### Fedora
The following command installs all required dependencies:
```sh
sudo dnf install gdal-devel proj-devel geos-devel sqlite-devel udunits2-devel
```

#### Arch

Get gdal, proj and geos from the main repos, and udunits from the AUR:

```
pacman -S gdal proj geos arrow podofo-0.9
yay/pacaur/yaourt/whatever -S udunits
```

#### `renv` or `conda`

There are several reports that `sf` fails to install as a source package when R is used with `renv`, or when R is installed in a `conda` environment. If you experience this, please do not raise an issue here, but 

* try to sort this out with the `renv` developers or the `conda` maintainers, or
* try to use binary installs of the `sf` package, e.g. from [r2u](https://github.com/eddelbuettel/r2u), or the Posit package manager

#### Other

To install on Debian, the [rocker geospatial](https://github.com/rocker-org/geospatial) Dockerfiles may be helpful. Ubuntu Dockerfiles are found [here](https://github.com/r-spatial/sf/tree/main/inst/docker).

### Multiple GDAL, GEOS and/or PROJ versions on your system

If you use dynamic linking (installation from source) and have multiple versions of these libraries installed (e.g. one from ubuntugis-unstable, another installed from source in `/usr/local/lib`) then this will in general not work, even when setting `LD_LIBRARY_PATH` manually. See [here](https://github.com/r-spatial/sf/issues/844) for the reason why. 

### lwgeom

Functions and methods that require `liblwgeom`, including ellipsoidal (not spherical or Eucledian) metrics (area, distances), are provide by and used from [lwgeom](https://github.com/r-spatial/lwgeom), which is also on [CRAN](https://cran.r-project.org/package=lwgeom).

## Contributing

* Contributions of all sorts are most welcome, issues and pull requests are the preferred ways of sharing them.
* When contributing pull requests, please adhere to the package style (in package code use `=` rather than `<-`; don't change indentation; tab stops of 4 spaces are preferred)
* This project is released with a [Contributor Code of Conduct](CONDUCT.md). By participating in this project you agree to abide by its terms.

## How to cite

Package `sf` can be cited as: 

* Edzer Pebesma, 2018.  Simple Features for R: Standardized Support
for Spatial Vector Data. The R Journal [10:1, 439-446.](https://journal.r-project.org/archive/2018/RJ-2018-009/index.html)

* Pebesma, E.; Bivand, R. (2023). [Spatial Data Science: With Applications in R](https://r-spatial.org/book/) 
(1st ed.). 314 pages. [Chapman and Hall/CRC](https://doi.org/10.1201/9780429459016).

## Acknowledgment

This project gratefully acknowledges financial [support](https://www.r-consortium.org/projects) from the

<a href="https://www.r-consortium.org/all-projects/awarded-projects/2016-group-1">
<img src="https://www.r-consortium.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/13/2016/09/RConsortium_Horizontal_Pantone.png" width="300">
</a>
<!--
<img src="http://pebesma.staff.ifgi.de/RConsortium_Horizontal_Pantone.png" width="300">
-->
